---
layout: default
title: Introduction to Annotating Sensitive Audio
parent: Sample Lesson Plans
grand_parent: Teaching with AVAnnotate
permalink: 
---

_This lesson is adapted from a use-case developed by Bethany Radcliff and Kylie Warkentin. This page serves as an introduction to annotation as a method for understanding sensitive audiovisual resources. While much of this lesson will focus on engaging with sensitive archival material in individual or group settings, it may also be read as a general introduction to annotating with AVAnnotate._

Introduction
In this lesson, students will learn how to create and present annotations using AVAnnotate, focusing in particular on working with sensitive archival material. This lesson will guide you in thinking through and creating annotations and how to use AudiAnnotate to collect and present those annotations. Students will need to set up a GitHub account in order to use the AVAnnotate application. You might prefer to download an open-source application such as Audacity to assist in generating annotations with time-stamps in the steps below, but, alternatively, you can also mark time-stamps manually on a spreadsheet by making a copy of the [AVAnnotate Quick Start template](https://av-annotate.org/how-to-use/). 

Audio Considerations
Though any publicly-accessible sound can be used for this lesson, this lesson is structured and based on “‘Criminal Syndicalism’ case, McComb, Mississippi,” a sound recording centered around Civil Rights issues in 1964 that is part of the John Beecher Sound Recordings Collection at the Harry Ransom Center. We have chosen this recording not only because of its historical value, but also because it speaks clearly to current reckonings with systemic racism in 2021. Like many historical recordings, this recording contains sensitive content that students and teachers often find difficult to discuss. In this case, this content includes racial slurs and descriptions of the experiences of Black students who were falsely arrested and imprisoned. Please read the full content warning and summary below before listening to the audio.

We have structured this lesson in a way that seeks to be mindful of trauma-informed pedagogy when working with sensitive resources. Trauma-informed pedagogy, developed by Janice Carello and Lisa D. Butler, emphasizes the importance of ensuring the physical and emotional security of learners by emphasizing the importance of contextualizing content and acknowledging and validating any challenges learners face when working with sensitive materials. Importantly, the goal of trauma-informed pedagogy is “to remove possible barriers to learning, not to remove traumatic, sensitive, or difficult material from the curriculum” (Carello & Butler). Likewise, we believe the unique challenge of working with sensitive materials should not deter anyone from learning from them. A trauma-informed approach to working with these materials allows both independent researchers and groups of researchers to empathetically and carefully work with materials others may have difficulties with that are nonetheless important to history.

In general, when selecting the audio material with which you’ll be working, you should review the holding institution’s language in describing and categorizing the audio for cues in handling, listening to, and ultimately presenting your chosen audio material. While some holding institutions may not have content warnings or descriptions of sensitive content for individual items, other institutions will have some kind of acknowledgement of troubling content or metadata listed either on the holding institution’s main site or collection page for the item. We recommend you look towards these places for language cues first (see Archives for Black Lives in Philadelphia’s (A4BLiP) “Anti-Racist Description Resources”). For example, the Harry Ransom Center at UT Austin contextualizes the Beecher Sound Collection, but at this time does not include a specific content warning related to the racist language in the tapes. The Ransom Center’s statement on outdated language shares a general warning that users may encounter sensitive, offensive, or outdated information in descriptions of archival materials.

Classrooom Suggestion
Make sure you follow your school’s guidelines for classroom work involving potentially upsetting or controversial material. While we recognize the value and necessity of having difficult conversations, we also recommend discussing class expectations repeatedly and prior to working with these types of materials. You may also choose to modify the lesson introductory materials to add the necessary context for the material your class is working with based on your class’s learning objectives. To minimize student harm and risk When working with sensitive audio, we recommend having a secondary recording for students who express a high level of discomfort to work with that may explore similar themes, but not include explicit or triggering language. The Studs Terkel Radio Archive provides a number of related resources and audio recordings geared at classroom use across secondary and post-secondary settings. 

About the Beecher “Syndicalism” Recording
This audio reel was recorded on October 19, 1964, likely by John Beecher’s wife, Barbara Beecher, on the portable reel-to-reel machine she operated. At the time, John Beecher, the great-great nephew of Harriet Beecher Stowe and Henry Ward Beecher, was working as a journalist, reporting on the Civil Rights movement in the South. The recording begins with John Beecher and members of Council of Federated Organizations (COFO) meeting with Black high school students and their parents after these students were released from jail in McComb, Mississippi on charges of criminal syndicalism, in which it seems the students have been falsely accused of damaging property by throwing a brick. Beecher speaks with the group about the importance of voting and fighting for equal treatment in the voting process. A white member of COFO discusses how his experience in jail was different than that of the Black students, how he was released without bond, and that his release was sooner. The students discuss the conditions in the jail and the treatment by policemen and guards. The parents of the students discuss how they were discriminated against, given limited interaction with their children, and how officers made visits a challenge.

Content Warning
In this recording, a racial slur is used at 16:06 by a student quoting the language said to them by a police officer while in jail. There is also explicit language used at 15:49, 16:30, and 16:39 by students quoting white police officers. At times in the recording, African American students and their parents are discussing mistreatment and trauma they experienced while the students were imprisoned.

References
This lesson plan was developed according to multiple sources, including Carello & Butler's "Practicing What We Teach: Trauma-informed Educational Practice" (2015) and materials developed by the Archives for Black Lives in Philadelphia’s (A4BLiP), particularly the “Anti-Racist Description Resources” (2020). 
